Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

Comm 131 – Introduction to Marketing
Course Syllabus
Section 02: Tue 11:30am-1:00pm / Fri 1:00-2:30pm Goodes Hall 141

Email:
Office:
Office Hours:

Professor: Joyce Eid
joyce.eid@queensu.ca
Goodes Hall LL124
Tue 10:00-11:00am / Fri 10:30-11:30am / or by appointment

Course Objectives
This course introduces you to the core concepts of marketing and how they relate to the overall
functioning of a firm. The course provides an overview of marketing concepts with attention
given to marketing theory, consumer behavior, and marketing strategy. By the end of the course,
you should be able to:
1. Understand marketing concepts and their application to organizations
2. Be able to apply these concepts to the analysis of marketing problems and
develop appropriate marketing strategies
3. Understand the need for a marketing orientation
4. Be able to successfully design and implement marketing plans and strategies
5. Understand the concept of the marketing mix and its application in traditional and
novel environments
6. Be able to critically evaluate case studies and analyze case problems
In order to achieve these objectives, students will put the core marketing concepts into practice
through in-class activities, case analysis and the development of a full-fledged marketing plan.
The course provides ample opportunity for students to hone their communications skills
through in-class presentations and discussions.

Course Expectations
My main expectation is that you will come prepared for class, be attentive, professional and
ready to participate. Lectures are designed to complement your readings by providing real life
examples on how the marketing concepts covered in your readings are applied in practice. I
expect you to ask questions, make comments and answer questions raised in class.
Things to Remember Each Class:
• Please put your nametag up and close your laptop/cellphone/tablet/etc.
• If there is anything you need clarified, be sure to ask in class or during office hours.
• Announcements and updates, if any, will be posted to the course website in D2L.

1

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

Things to Remember When You Hand in Assignments:
• All assignments must clearly display your first and last name, section, and student number.
• All group assignments must use the team title page (found on the course website).
• Keep track of assignments due dates. Late assignments will not be accepted.

Required Course Materials
1.
2.
3.
4.

Text: Marketing: An Introduction 6th Canadian Edition, Armstrong, Kotler, Trifts, Buchwitz.
Case package available through the Smith School of Business case room.
Living cases found through the course website.
Other materials and readings will be provided on the course website or in class.

Course Evaluation Overview
Participation
Quizzes
Individual Case Assignments
Team Case Presentation & Report
Team Project: Marketing Plan
Part 2: Consumer and Market Profile: (10%)
Part 3: Marketing Strategy (15%)
Part 4: Presentation: (5%)
Final Exam
Total

6%
15%
4%
10%
30%

35%
100%

Course Evaluation Details
Personal Information Form and Team Contract
Personal information form (PIF): each student is required to complete a PIF. The purpose of the
form is to give me some information about each of you, so I can tailor the course to your
interests, experiences, and goals. The form can be found on the course website under the ‘Admin
Section’. Please submit an electronic copy to the course website by Thursday, January 17th
(11:50 p.m.) at the latest. Early submissions are welcome.
Team contract: early in the semester teams will be formed. Each team must fill a team contract
template available on the course website under the ‘Admin Section’ and submit an electronic
copy on the course website by latest Thursday, January 31st (11:59 p.m.). In case conflict
arises within a team, the contract should be your first point of reference to guide you through the
conflict resolution process. However, if the conflict persists then you should inform me, and I
will do my best to help you resolve the problem.

2

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

Participation (6%)
Active participation is about contributing to the class as a whole in a positive way. This
presumes that you will be present and prepared; however, simply being present is not a measure
of active participation. Active participation is reflected in contributing to the class discussion
by activities such as: answering questions, reacting to statements made by the instructor or by
other students, sharing input on in-class exercises, and making insightful comments.
Throughout the term, I will keep notes regarding students who participate actively, as well as
those who engage in unprofessional behavior. These notes are used to create an assessment of
your overall participation during the course. Engaging in unprofessional disruptive behavior will
result in grade deductions. Unprofessional behavior would include: arriving to class late, being
disrespectful of others, being frequently absent, violating the no screens policy, etc.
During each class, I will track and assess the contributions made by each student. At the end of
the term, you will be awarded between 0% and 6% for your participation. Please note that this is
not an attendance grade, but, naturally, you will have to be in class regularly to consistently
contribute to class discussion and earn your participation points. Also failing to submit either the
PIF and/or complete the online team peer evaluation (GRASP) will each result in an automatic
1% deduction in your total participation grade.
Quizzes (15%)
During the semester, there will be four in-class quizzes accounting for 5% each. The lowest quiz
grade will be dropped. A quiz will take place at the beginning of the class in which it has been
scheduled and I will not grant extra time for those who arrive late for a quiz. If you are unable to
attend a quiz, due to short term illness or other extenuating circumstances, you are able to drop
that quiz. Make up quizzes will not be assigned. These quizzes aim to (1) help you demonstrate
your personal knowledge (2) ensure that you are reviewing the material up-to-date and prepare
you to the final exam.
Below is a tentative quiz schedule. The instructor might change these dates, if necessary. If a
change is to be made to the schedule below, an announcement will be posted to the course
website at least 48 hours in advance.
▪
▪
▪
▪

Quiz 1: Friday, January 18th
Quiz 2: Tuesday, January 29th
Quiz 3: Tuesday, February 26th
Quiz 4: Friday, March 8th

Online Case Comprehension Quizzes (4%)
For the four cases that your team is not presenting, each student is required to complete an online
case quiz posted on the course website. Each quiz consists of 4 multiple choice questions and one
short essay question focused on your comprehension of the marketing problem and alternatives
under consideration. You get two tries to complete the questions correctly. The case assignment will
be active on the course website one week before a case is being presented in class, and you will have
until midnight (11:59 p.m.) the day before the case is being presented to complete the assignment.

3

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

Team Case Presentations and Reports (10%) See Appendix 1 for a detailed description.
Groups of 5-6 students will be formed early in the semester. Throughout the semester, each team
will do one case presentation. Three teams will be assigned to the same case and each team will be
required to present their independent analysis in class and answer to questions from the audience.
In addition to the presentation, each team will submit a 3-page executive summary of their case
analysis and solution. Electronic submissions of the PPT presentation and executive report are due
on the course website by 11:59 p.m. the evening before the class in which the case is being
presented.
The assignment of cases can be found in Appendix 1.
Group Project – Marketing Plan (30%) See Appendix 2 for a detailed description.
For this project, with your groups, you are to come up with a new consumer product and launch
it in the Canadian market. Each group will be assigned an industry from which the team will
come up with a new product and build a Marketing Plan. There are 4 parts to the Marketing Plan:
Part 1: Product Proposal (for approval only)
Groups should submit their product proposal on the course website for approval by Thursday,
January 31st (11:59 p.m.). A proposal could receive one of the following feedback types:
(1) Approval: in this case the team can proceed with the proposed idea as presented.
(2) Conditional Acceptance: in this case the product proposal is viable but needs to be
amended based on feedback.
(3) Rejection: the product proposal does not fit the course requirement and the team must
submit a new proposal for approval. The new proposal should be emailed to instructor as well
as uploaded to the course website.
Part 2: Consumer and Market Profile (10%)
Before your group can come up with the marketing strategy, it will need to have a solid
knowledge of the market and consumer profile. For this part of the assignment, the group is
required to conduct a situation analysis, select a target market after identifying and evaluating
all existing target segments, and justify the target market choice. Your group has to submit
Part 2 electronically on the course website by Wednesday, February 27th (11:59 p.m.).
Part 3: Marketing Strategy (15%)
This part of the marketing plan provides the actual strategy (the 4 P’s), including your
group’s financial calculations and implementation plan. Your strategy should be specifically
constructed for the target market your group described in the Consumer and Market Profile
(Part 2). Your marketing strategy should be submitted electronically on the course website by
Monday, March 25th (11:59 p.m.).
Part 4: Marketing Plan Presentation (5%)
During the last 2 weeks of the semester, each group will give a 12-minute presentation (plus an
additional 5 minutes for questions) on parts 2 & 3 of their marketing plan. Presentations should
4

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

include only the most essential information and should focus on the logic behind the chosen
consumer segment and marketing tactics. All teams must submit their PPT presentation
electronically by Monday, March 25th (11:59 p.m.).
Please print one copy of your presentation and bring it to class on Tuesday, March 26th. Your
printed copy should be identical to what was submitted on Monday, March 25th as no changes are
accepted after the electronic submission.
Final Exam (35%)
A closed-book final exam will be scheduled for the exam period. The exam will cover the major
terms and concepts covered in the entire course (i.e., the exam is cumulative). This includes inclass materials as well as all assigned readings and cases. The exam will be three hours. The
format of the exam will be discussed in class.

General Course Policies
Laptop/Cellphone (Screen) Policy
I have a NO SCREENS POLICY in class, with the exception of those students who have
received special permission from me. Research finds that taking notes on a laptop hinders
learning as compared to writing notes by hand. Moreover, laptops and cellphones have been
found to not only hinder your learning but also are distracting to those around you. Therefore, in
order to maximize your and other’s learning, please keep your laptops, cellphones, tablets, etc.
closed. Class slides will be posted before each session for your review and to help you take notes
in class.
Course Website and Slides
The course website is a very important resource to consult regularly to access session slides, keep
track of important announcements and check feedback on your submissions. I will use the
‘Announcements’ feature on the course website to post news relevant to the entire class. I
encourage you to set alerts, so you stay up-to-date with these announcements.
If you have difficulty with the website, please contact the Smith School of Business IT Help
Desk at helpdesk@business.queenu.ca or 613.533.3072.
The slides are designed for use as part of COMM131 at Queen's University and is the property of
the instructor unless otherwise stated. Third party copyrighted materials (such as book chapters
and articles) have either been licensed for use in this course or fall under an exception or
limitation in Canadian Copyright law. Copying this material for distribution (e.g. uploading
material to a commercial third-party website) can lead to a violation of Copyright law.
Questions About the Course
Weekly office hours will be held. If you need to meet outside these office hours, you can
schedule an appointment by email. The easiest way to communicate with me is by email. I will
check emails regularly and try to respond within 24 hours unless it is the weekend (on some
weekends I may have limited access to email). In all email communications make sure you
include: course number, a meaningful email subject, you name and student ID to the message.
Name Cards
You will be provided with name tags at the beginning of the semester. On the back of your name
tag you will have fields for each class where you can write your feedback (i.e. what you liked,

5

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

what you did not like, a question or a comment). Your feedback will help me tailor the course to
your needs and address any ambiguous points in a prompt manner. Please note that this does not
count as class participation.
Make sure you return your name card at the end of each session. If the name on your name card
is not correct or is different from what you would like to be called, please use a marker to correct
and make sure to include your official name on the back of the name card so I know who it
belongs to.
Accommodations
Queen's University is committed to achieving full accessibility for persons with disabilities. Part
of this commitment includes arranging academic accommodations for students with disabilities
to ensure they have an equitable opportunity to participate in all of their academic activities. If
you are a student with a disability and think you may need accommodations, you are strongly
encouraged to contact Queen’s Student Accessibility Services (QSAS) and register as early as
possible. For more information, including important deadlines, please visit the QSAS website at:
http://www.queensu.ca/studentwellness/accessibility-services/
Students with physical and learning disabilities must contact me as soon as possible in order for
accommodations/modifications for course expectations to be made.
Group Formation and Peer Evaluation Form
Within the first few weeks of the semester, I will assign you to groups. These groups cannot be
changed. You will work with this group throughout the semester on both the case
analysis/presentation as well as the term project. At the end of the semester, you are required to
complete an online Peer Evaluation Form by Sunday, April 7th (11:59 p.m.). Poor peer
evaluations will result in reduced grades on group assignments. Thus, your final grade for all
group assignments will be based on two things: (1) the quality of the assignment and (2) peer
evaluation.
Appealing Grades
If you have a grading concern and would like a particular question in an assignment re-assessed,
then you need to write and appeal memo and email it to me. Your memo should be no longer
than one page in which you must include your name, student ID and a concise explanation of
why you think your original answer deserves a better grade than the one you received. A copy of
the deliverable must to be attached to your request. A poor mark is not sufficient to appeal your
grade. If you have a convincing argument, then the concerned question(s) will be re-graded. The
result of the process could be that your grade will remain the same, increase, or decrease. If you
are appealing a group deliverable, then all team members must want to appeal the grade and
should work together on the appeal memo.
If the reason why you appeal your grade is based on a comparison to another individual or team
work, then you must obtain the permission of the other student or team, since both deliverables
will be re-assessed, and the re-evaluation process can result in the two grades remaining the
same, increasing, or decreasing. You may submit an appeal as early as 1 WEEK AFTER the
assignment or quiz has been handed back and you have 2 WEEKS from that point to submit your
appeal.

6

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

Any requests to review the final exam or appeal a final exam grade must go through the official
university and commerce office procedures.
Extenuating Circumstances
For brief absences please go to the course home page on D2L and click on the “Brief Absence”
button to complete the form. Brief Absence forms must be submitted during your brief absence
or within 24 hours of the end of the brief absence. Late requests will not be considered.
For short-term or long-term extenuating circumstances please contact the commerce office and
complete the “Request for Academic Considerations for Extenuating Circumstances” form and
either the “Verification of Personal Health Condition” or a “Confidential Verification” form.
If you experience extenuating circumstances and are not sure what to do, please send me an
email and/or contact the Commerce Office.
Please note that for brief absences, make up quizzes and assignments will not be assigned. If you
are unable to attend a quiz, you will be able to drop that quiz. Group assignment deadlines and
presentations cannot be moved. In case of emergency or extenuating circumstances, please
email me if you or one of your team members will be unable to attend one of your team
presentations.
Academic Integrity
Queen’s students, faculty, administrators, and staff all have responsibilities for supporting and
upholding the fundamental values of academic integrity. Academic integrity is constituted by the
five core fundamental values of honesty, trust, fairness, respect and responsibility, and by the
quality of courage (see www.academicintegrity.org). These values and qualities are central to the
building, nurturing, and sustaining of an academic community in which all members of the
community will thrive. Adherence to the values expressed through academic integrity forms a
foundation for the “freedom of inquiry and exchange of ideas” essential to the intellectual life of
the University.
Students are responsible for familiarizing themselves with, and adhering to, the regulations
concerning academic integrity. General information on academic integrity is available at
Academic Integrity @ Queen’s University; an overview of Smith’s own policies and procedures
are also important to review. You may also find these frequently asked questions on academic
integrity helpful for your understanding of the concept and the regulations surrounding
it. Departures from academic integrity include, but are not limited to, plagiarism, use of
unauthorized materials, facilitation, forgery, and falsification. Actions which contravene the
academic integrity regulations carry sanctions that can range from a warning, to loss of grades on
an assignment, to failure of a course, to requirement to withdraw from the university. Helpful
FAQ’s about academic integrity are at:
https://smith.queensu.ca/about/academic_integrity/faq.php
To assist you in identifying the boundary between acceptable collaboration and a departure from
academic integrity in this specific course, I provide the following guidelines for individual and
group work. If my expectations still are not clear to you, ask me! The onus is on you to ensure
that your actions do not violate standards of academic integrity.

7

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

Individual Work: Assignments and examinations identified as individual in nature must be the
result of your individual effort. Outside sources must be properly cited and referenced in
assignments; be careful to cite all sources, not only of direct quotations but also of ideas. Ideas,
information and quotations taken from the internet must also be properly cited and referenced.
Help for citing sources is available through the Queen’s University library:
http://library.queensu.ca/help-services/citing-sources.
Group Work: In a group assignment, the group members will work together to develop an
original, consultative response to the assigned topic. Group members must not look at, access or
discuss any aspect of any other group’s solution (including a group from a previous year), nor
allow anyone outside of the group to look at any aspect of the group’s solution. Likewise, you are
prohibited from utilizing the internet or any other means to access others’ solutions to, or
discussions of, the assigned material. The names of each group member must appear on the
submitted assignment, and no one other than the people whose names appear on the assignment
may have contributed in any way to the submitted solution. In short, the group assignments must
be the work of your group, and your group only. All group members are responsible for ensuring
the academic integrity of the work that the group submits.
Turnitin.com
When assignments are submitted through the dropbox on the course website, they may be
processed through Turnitin.com. Turnitin is a plagiarism detection tool that checks your
submission against other texts, including websites, journal articles, books, and other student
submissions in order to verify the originality of the submission. More information about Turnitin
will appear when you first log in to the course website.
Research Pool
COMM 131 is participating in the research pool, which means it is eligible for research pool credit.
All details about the research pool can be found on the research pool website (https://smithresearchpool.sona-systems.com/Default.aspx), which is administered by Professor Laurence
Ashworth (lashworth@business.queensu.ca). All questions about the research pool should be
directed to him.
Grading
When grading, we look for three broad things: content, coherence and grammar. In order to get
a good mark, you must perform well on all three dimensions. Content refers to your ability to
answer the question in a compelling, thoughtful, and insightful manner that draws heavily on
course concepts. My advice is to always refer to the assignment handout and grading scheme, as
they provide a checklist of what should be included in your submission. Coherence means that
the assignment must be succinct and follow a logical flow that ties each of your decisions
together. Coherence is best achieved by careful planning before you write. Think about the broad
points you want to make first, and then work out a structure that will allow you to touch on all
those points in a way that makes sense. Finally, I expect to see professional, edited work (always
check for grammatical and spelling errors).

8

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

Grading Scheme
Percent Letter Point Description
90-100 A+
4.3 Exceptional performance that exceeds the highest standards. The course content has
85-89

A

4.0

80-84

A-

3.7

77-79

B+

3.3

73-76

B

3.0

70-72

B-

2.7

67-69

C+

2.3

63-66
60-62

C
C-

2.0
1.7

57-59
53-56
50-52

D+
D
D-

1.3
1.0
0.7

F

0.0

<50

been mastered, the ability to apply the material in new ways has been demonstrated, and
an understanding of the wider context is evident, all to an exceptional degree.
Outstanding performance that meets the highest standards. Course content has been
mastered, the ability to apply the material in new ways has been demonstrated, and an
understanding of the wider context is evident.
Excellent performance that meets very high standards. Mastery of the course material
and ability to apply the material in new ways have been demonstrated.
Very good performance that meets high standards. The course content has been
mastered, with a comprehensive understanding of concepts and techniques.
Good comprehension of the course material. The expectations for the course have been
met.
Reasonably good comprehension of the course material. Most expectations for the
course have been met.
Acceptable comprehension of the course material, meeting and, in some cases
exceeding, basic standards.
Generally acceptable comprehension of the course material, meeting basic standards.
Minimally acceptable comprehension of the course material while falling short of basic
standards in some areas.
Comprehension of the course material was unsatisfactory, but sufficient for credit to be
granted.
Comprehension of the course material was unsatisfactory; barely sufficient for credit to
be granted.
Minimum standards have not been met, credit has not been granted.

9

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE
Week Class
Date
Concepts Covered
1
1
Tuesday,
Course Introduction &
January 8th
Marketing Defined
2
Friday,
Customer Value &
th
January 11
Marketing Planning
2
3
Tuesday,
Segmentation, Targeting,
January 15th
& Positioning (1)
th
January 17
4
Friday,
Segmentation, Targeting,
January 18th
& Positioning (2)
3
5
Tuesday,
Case Analysis & Group
January 22nd
Project Overview
6
Friday,
Consumer Behavior
January 25th
4
7
Tuesday,
Market Research
th
January 29
January 31st
8
Friday,
Quantitative Analysis
February 1st
5
February 4th
9

10
6
7

Tuesday,
February 5th
February 7th

Products & Services

Friday,
February 8th
February 12th
& 15th
February 19th
& 22nd

New Product
Development
No Class:
Midterm Week
No Class:
Reading Week

Readings
Course Syllabus
Chapter 1 (pp. 5-14)
Chapter 1 (pp. 14-26, 32-33)
Chapter 2 (pp. 46-70)
Chapter 7 (239-252)
Benefit segmentation (Online)
Chapter 7 (252-266)
Beer’s Image (Online)
Case: Eden Creations
Case Analysis Guides (Online)
Chapter 6 (197-218)
Chapter 5 (157-185)

Quizzes and Course Deliverables

Due: PIF
Quiz 1
(Material from Classes 2 & 3)
Individual Case Analysis Practice

Quiz 2
(Material from Classes 4 & 6)
Due: MPP#1 & Team Contract

Quant Study Guide
Due: Graham’s Case Quiz or Report
& PPT (Teams 1,8,15)
Chapter 8 (278-282, 297-307)
Case: Graham’s Pharmacy
Due: Clean Edge Case Quiz or Report
& PPT (Teams 2, 9,14)
Chapter 8 (282-297)
Case: Clean Edge

10

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

Week
8

Class
11

12
9

13
14

10
15

16

11

17
18

12

19
20

13

21
22

Date
Tuesday,
February 26th
February 27th
Friday,
March 1st
Tuesday,
March 5th
Friday,
March 8th
March 11th

Concepts Covered
Branding

Readings
Chapter 9 (322-342)

Pricing

Chapter 10 (353-380)

Integrated Marketing
Communications (1)
Integrated Marketing
Communications (2)

Tuesday,
March 12th
March 14th

Advertising (1)

Friday,
March 15th
March 18th

Advertising (2)

Chapter 13 (468-477)
Chapter 14 (509-512, 529-535)
Chapter 13 (494-497)
Chapter 15 (547-570)

Quizzes and Course Deliverables
Quiz 3
(Material from Class 8)
Due: MPP# 2

Quiz 4
(Material from Classes 10 & 11)
Due: CMHA Case Quiz or Report &
PPT (Teams 3,7,13)

Chapter 13 (477- 481)
Case: CMHA Kingston
Due: FAB Case Quiz or Report & PPT
(Teams 4,10,12)

Tuesday,
Channels
March 19th
Friday,
Course Wrap up &
March 22nd
Exam Review
March 25th
Tuesday,
Marketing Plan
March 26th
Presentations
Friday,
Marketing Plan
March 29th
Presentations
Tuesday,
Marketing Plan
April 2nd
Presentations
Friday,
Marketing Plan
April 5th
Presentations
Sunday, April 7th

Chapter 13 (481- 493)
Case: FAB
Due: Stone City Ales Case Quiz or
Report & PPT (Teams 5,6,11)
Chapter 11 (391-409), Chapter
12 (433-452) & SCA Case

Due: MPP# 3 & 4
Teams Presenting: 3,13,14
Teams Presenting: 1,2,5,15
Teams Presenting: 6,8,11,12
Teams Presenting: 4,7,9,10
Due: Peer Evaluations (11:59 p.m.)

11

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

APPENDIX 1: GROUP CASE PRESENTATION AND REPORT
Throughout the semester, each team will do one case presentation. Three teams will be assigned to
analyze the same case and each team will present their independent analysis in class.
Copies of the grading schemes can be found in the ‘Admin Section’ of the course website.
Following is the schedule for in-class case presentations. Note that assignment electronic
submission is due the day before the actual in-class presentation takes place.
Date
Case (Focal Topic)
th
Tuesday, February 5
Graham’s Pharmacy
Friday,
February 8th
Clean Edge Razor
5th
Tuesday, March 12th
Canadian Mental Health Association (CMHA) Kingston
th
(SSB (SSB
LivingLiving
Case)Case)
Friday, March 15
FAB
Tuesday, March 19th
Stone City Ales (SSB Living Case)

Teams
1,8,15
2,9,14
3,7,13
4,10,12
5,6,11

Presentation / Q&A period
• Each team will give a 5-minute presentation of their solution. Presentations will be
strictly timed. All team members should be present on the presentation day and take
an active role in presenting and/or answering questions.
• The class will have 5 minutes to ask questions following each team’s presentation.
Participations points are awarded based on the quality of the questions asked.
The presentation should cover the following:
1. Clear and concise problem statement
2. Key points from situation analysis and implications
3. Marketing objectives
4. Analysis of alternatives considered, even if not chosen
5. Recommended course of action and implementation
Case Report
In addition to the presentation, each team will hand in a 3-page executive summary of their
case analysis and solution. The write-up should be double spaced, 12 size font. Margins on all
four sides of each page should be 1 inch. You may include up to 3 pages of exhibits and
appendices. Please submit an electronic copy to the course dropbox and make sure you use the
team title page (found on the course website).
You should build your analysis and recommendations using the information given in the case
and respect the time frame in which the case is written.
The executive summary should include the following:
1. Clear and concise problem statement
2. Summary of your situation analysis and implications
3. Marketing objectives
4. Detailed analysis of alternatives considered even if not chosen
5. Recommended course of action and implementation plan

12

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

Appendix 2: Group Project—Marketing Plan
The marketing plan project consists of four parts. Due dates for this project are as follows:
Part 1—Topic Proposal:

Thursday, January 31st

Part 2—Consumer and Market Profile:

Wednesday, February 27th

Part 3—Marketing Strategy Report + PPT:

Monday, March 25th (all teams)

Part 4—In-Class Presentation:

Tuesday, March 26th
Friday, March 29th
Tuesday, April 2nd
Friday, April 5th

(Teams 3,13,14)
(Teams 1,2,5,15)
(Teams 6, 8, 11, 12)
(Teams 4, 7, 9, 10)

Grading
Grading schemes to assess each part of the project can be found in the ‘Admin Section’ of
the course website.
Grading will be based on:
• Completeness: required information is covered as outlined in the assignment handout and
grading scheme.
• Quality of marketing plan: logical flow from market analysis to marketing objectives
(SMART) to sound product and marketing mix decisions, appropriate use of supporting
information/exhibit/appendices, and clear compelling justification of key marketing
decisions by drawing on insights learned from your market and customer analysis
exercise.
• Writing style (organized, coherent, succinct, free of spelling/grammatical errors, etc.)
Outside sources must be properly cited and referenced in all parts; be careful to cite all sources,
not only of direct quotations but also of ideas.
You will be given extensive feedback on each part of your marketing plan in a timely fashion, so
you have time to incorporate that feedback into subsequent parts.
Part 1—Topic Proposal (Due January 31st)
For this project, you are to come up with a new product and launch it within the Canadian market
(or part of the Canadian market). It must be clearly innovative and nothing similar to it can exist.
You cannot offer a service and your product must be a business-to-consumer product.
Your new product can be for either a new or existing company. If your innovative product is for
a new company then you will have to launch it under a new brand name. If it is for an existing
company then you can either launch your new product under one of the company’s existing
brands (i.e. brand extension) or launch it as a new brand in a new or existing category.
For example, if a team is assigned to the ‘sporting goods’ industry, it could come up with a new
product (e.g., water repellent football). This new product could be launched as part of a startup
business for which a new brand is created. On the other hand, it could be a new product for
Nike company. In the latter case, the product could be launched under Nike brand name (e.g.

13

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

Nike Water Repellent Football) or a new brand name could be created under the umbrella
brand Nike (e.g. Dry Power).
Please note that you do not have to know if your new product is technically feasible, just that it
has a reasonable chance of being produced (i.e., your product must be realistic, not science
fiction). The more realistic, the easier Parts 2 and 3 will be.
On Tuesday, Jan 22nd you will be assigned to your groups and each group will be assigned an
industry. Together, the team should choose a product for which you will build your marketing
plan. On January 31st each group should submit a brief proposal (1 page, double spaced) to the
course dropbox, which provides a description of the innovative product they pitch. This write-up
should include the following: a description of the chosen product and justification of why you
choose the product.
Part 2 –The Consumer and Market Profile (Due February 27th)
The aim is to conduct an in-depth understanding of your consumer and the market within which
you will sell your product.
Part 2 should be no more than 5 typed, double spaced pages, 12 font size. Margins on all
four sides of each page should be 1 inch. You may include up to 3 pages of exhibits and
appendices. Please submit an electronic copy in the course dropbox. Please use the team title
page (found on the course website).
This deliverable should cover the following:
Section 1: Product Introduction (approx. 0.5 pages)
Briefly introduce your new product: ( 1 ) description of what you will be offering to the
market and (2) what makes your product different (i.e., product differentiation).
Section 2: Market Profile (approx. 1 page)
Discuss main findings from your industry and market analysis. A solid analysis draws on
secondary data sources available in the library1, uses numbers and evidence to describe market
conditions, structure, trends and consumer behavior. You should also highlight key points from
your SWOT analysis while discussing the implications.
•
•
•

Trends that support the product’s success and threats that might hinder success
Consumption rates, size of the market2, future growth potential of the market, barriers
to entry
Specific market shares of direct competitors (manufacturers and their brands) and the
presence of indirect competitors

NOTE: given the limited space - You should include the details of your SWOT (i.e. points +
implications) and industry analysis in exhibits and summarize the key findings and implications
in the body of the report.
1

Secondary data sources are available in the library to help you obtain relevant information for
this section. Please refer to the library training notes posted online.
2
You may use step-down analysis to help you with your calculations. Please refer to the
quantitative analysis notes for examples and details of the step-down approach.
14

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

Section 3: Segmentation (approx. 1.5-2 pages)
In developing your segmentation strategy, be sure to list and discuss all possible and plausible
segments and present a detailed analysis of your market segments (a segmentation grid, can be
included as an exhibit – but discuss the key points for each plausible segment in the report). Be
sure to segment the market on the most relevant segmentation variables.
Section 4: Target Market Choice and Customer Profile (approx. 1-1.5 page)
After having discussed all plausible existing market segments, choose the target segment you
plan to pursue with your innovative product. You should present a compelling argument for your
target segment selection. When crafting your justification of target market choice be sure to use
proper terminology and evaluation criteria covered in class.
Present a detailed explanation of why your target segment needs the product and provide a
profile of a typical customer in your segment (i.e. use demographic, geographic, psychographic,
behavioral descriptors) and explain what consumer behavior factors/sub-factors are likely to
affect your target segment.
I expect to see extensive and accurate applications of marketing segmentation and consumer
behavior characteristics.
Section 5: Positioning (approx. 0.5 pages)
Present the positioning for your product, making sure to include: (1) a positioning statement as
well as a (2) positioning map (the map could be included in the exhibits, but summarize the key
findings and implications in the body of the report).
You should construct your positioning map based on criteria and dimensions that are important to
your market. Be sure that your positioning map plots all your direct and indirect competitors
identified earlier in the report and that it also plots all market segments identified in your
segmentation grid. The positioning of your competitors and target segments on the map is critical
to provide a snap shot of the market.
Part 3—Marketing Strategy (Due March 25th)
In this section, you will build the actual marketing plan for the product including: (1) the
marketing strategy (the 4P’s), (2) your group’s financial calculations and (3) implementation
plan. The best plans touch on all of these points, while presenting a well thought out and
integrated plan that links each and every decision to one another. For example, your strategy
should be specifically constructed for the target market your group described in the Consumer
and Market Profile (Part 2).
Remember that the appendix is a great place to insert supporting material. For example, many
papers will include an image of the product, advertisements, numerical calculations, detailed
implementation timeline, etc., in the appendix. However, be sure to discuss any key points and
their implications within the report itself.

15

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

Section 1: Introduction and Objectives (approx. 0.5 pages)
Develop a set of 3-4 SMART objectives for your marketing plan. These objectives should guide
your marketing strategy moving forward.
Section 2: Marketing Plan (i.e., Marketing Mix) (approx. 5.5 pages)
Using your objectives as a guide, develop a detailed marketing plan ( 4Ps) while providing
justification for your marketing decisions. Specifically, you should provide the following:
Product:
• Product description: product levels, product class, and individual product
decisions (e.g. attributes, style, level of customization, packaging, etc.)
• Brand development strategy and related branding decisions (e.g. name, logo, color, etc.)
• Position in the product lifecycle (PLC): discuss the context of the PLC stage your
product falls into and what this means for your new launch
Pricing:
• Price: (1) price for intermediary (if any) (2) final price for consumer
• Product margins
• Pricing strategy used and why: cost based, value based, penetration or skimming
• Pricing adjustments: e.g., sales promotions, segmented pricing, etc.
Distribution:
• Type(s) of channel used and why
• Distribution strategy adopted and why
• Where the product is available/number of outlets and trade promotions (if any)
• How should the product be presented/displayed in the outlet
• Potential channel conflicts (if appropriate) and mitigation plan
Promotion:
• Communication plan (i.e. SMART communication objectives, key message, target
segment, budget, etc.)
• Develop an appropriate integrated marketing communication (IMC) plan. Be specific
and explain your reasons for choosing each communication element and how to create
synergies between the different IMC elements chosen. It is important to consider the
costs and viability of all elements of your IMC plan. For example, for advertising,
remember to include details of the message strategy, execution style, and the media
strategy (e.g. media choice, media scheduling pattern, etc.)
Section 3: Financial Analysis (approx. 1 page)
Present a financial analysis that calculates the proposed return on investment from your
marketing plan. Here, you should estimate the costs as well as the outcomes of your plan (note:
the key outcomes you discuss should be directly related to your objectives). Be sure to consider:
•
•
•
•

Costs (fixed and variable) for your entire marketing plan
Projected sales in $ and units (be realistic!!)
Profits (or losses) for year 1
Contribution margin
16

Prof. Eid
Comm 131 [Sec 02] – Winter 2019

•
•

Break-even $, units, market share
Marketing ROI

Be sure to include the details of all your calculations in the exhibits and discuss only the key
findings in the text. If your product is not going to be profitable in the 1st year, please include
sales forecasts into the next year(s) to show when your product will be profitable. Note: you are
not expected to develop promotional plans for multiple years, but you should specify when you
expect to start making profit for your new product launch.
For this section, please make assumptions as needed. Specifically, when trying to determine fixed
and variable costs, it is unlikely that you will be able to come up with accurate numbers. Thus, I
expect you to extrapolate from other information you might find and/or make assumptions. You
must tell me how you arrived at these numbers so I can follow your logic. Also, I do expect you
to be specific and accurate with the costs for your promotion plan (e.g. cost of media purchase,
PR campaign, sales/trade promotions, sales force, etc.)
Section 4: Implementation (approx. 1 page)
Discuss your implementation strategy. This should include a specific and detailed sequence and
timeline of your key marketing plan steps. For example: When does your company develop its
product? Secure distribution? Launch its product? Run its various advertisements? Introduce a
sales promotion? Expand to the new market? Consider all of the important steps in your plan.
You may find it efficient to summarize the implementation timeline with a Gantt Chart in the
Exhibit.
Part 3 should be no longer than 8 typed, double spaced pages, 12 size font. Margins on all four
sides of each page should be 1 inch. You may include up to 3 pages of exhibits and appendices.
Please submit an electronic copy on the course dropbox. Please use the team title page (found on
the course website).
For more general information about marketing plans, please refer to pg. 65 of the course
textbook.
Part 4—Marketing Plan Presentation (All Group’s Slides Due March 25th)
During the last 2 weeks of the semester, each group will give a 12-minute presentation (plus an
additional 5 minutes for questions) on both parts of their marketing plan (Part 2 and Part 3).
•
•
•
•
•
•

Key points from SWOT analysis
Market segmentation and choice of target market with justification
SMART marketing plan objectives
Marketing mix (4Ps) along with logic explanation/justification
Financial analysis
Implementation timeline

Please print one copy of your presentation and bring it to class on Tuesday, March 26th. Your
printed copy should be identical to what was submitted electronically on Monday, March 25th as no
changes are accepted after that date.
Presentations should cover only the most essential information and should focus on the logic
behind the chosen segment and marketing tactics. All team members must participate in the
presentation. Presentations will be evaluated in terms of style, content, and handling of questions.
17

